The Vajra Words Unveiled

A Commentary on the Düsum Sangyé Prayer to the Guru

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Lotus-Born, Exalted Lotus,Lotus King, to you I bow—Ḍākinīs, please grant permissionTo unveil
these vajra words!

The Düsum Sangyé prayer can be explained according to three types of meanings:

The outer, literal meaning,
The inner, hidden meaning,
The secret, ultimate meaning.

1. The Outer, Literal Meaning

The explanation of this prayer, beginning with "Embodiment of buddhas of past, present and future,
Guru Rinpoche" (dü sum sangyé guru rinpoché), is as follows. At the beginning of time,
when there were neither sentient beings nor buddhas, there was the teacher, dharmakāya
Samantabhadra, the forebear of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. By his blessing arose the five sambhogakāya
families, and from them infinitely vast cloud-banks of pure lands, such as Ghanavyūha.
Then, the supreme peaceful and wrathful nirmāṇakāya emanations, the vidyādharas, vīras
and yoginīs appeared in infinite forms to teach disciples according to their capacities,
whether inferior or superior.

As the Guru's vajra words proclaim: "'Self-manifested Padma'—this is what I am called..."[1]
One of his infinite emanations appeared in, of the four continents of the world, our Jambu
continent.[2] To the west of the Vajra Seat at Jambu's center lies Uḍḍiyāna, which is Apabhraṃśa
for "the land of the sky dancers." And it was upon the Sindhu Ocean to the northwest
of Uḍḍiyāna (corrupted to "Orgyen") that this great master took miraculous birth.

Among the inconceivable number of deeds in his liberating life-stories, most importantly the
Guru undertook an infinite variety of beneficial deeds for the sake of the teachings and
beings in Tibet, the land of snows. Upon one such occasion, the Guru bestowed upon his principal
disciples, especially the Dharma King and his heirs, this prayer of vajra words, the
very sound of the dharmatā. The meaning of this prayer may be explained as follows.

The Guru encompasses the complete abandonment and realization of all the buddhas (sangyé) who
have come, will come, and presently reside in the three times (dü sum) of past, present
and future. He is a manifestation of every one of these tathāgatas who have perfected the
twofold benefit, and he embodies their blessings. This precious master (guru rinpoché) from
Uḍḍiyāna, then, is equal in qualities to a mighty king who fulfils all wishes. He has the
power to effortlessly grant all the excellent supreme and ordinary siddhis (ngödrub kün)
for the sake of this life and the next. Thus, the Guru is a lord (dak) whose glory is universal
among all the beings within existence and peace, and his power to bestow siddhis upon
those with faith, devotion, and good fortune, is unequalled.

Of the infinite names by which he is known throughout all the various realms, outwardly he is
primarily Padmasambhava, the great guru of Uḍḍiyāna.

Inwardly, since the Guru has transcended all defiled phenomena and completely overcome all forms
of attachment within the three realms of existence, he has attained complete mastery
over the kingdom of unsurpassable, unified great bliss (dewa chenpö). The Guru is therefore
superior to all ordinary beings, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas, and his realization
is one with all the tathāgatas. At the feet (shab) of such a being, we prostrate
with devotion.

Secretly, he dispels all the obstacles (barché kün sel), whether they be: on the outer level,
the eight or sixteen dangers; on the inner level, the concepts related to the five poisons,
and the destructive diseases and evil spirits they give rise to; or, on the secret level,
the blockages of the channels, winds and bindus. The Guru, in defeating our enemies, the
four māras (düdul), is totally courageous; he is a Mighty Wrathful King (drakpo tsal),
majestic in his victory upon every front. Although the Guru does not waver from peace, out
of his compassion he appears to intractable beings as extremely wrathful, an embodiment of
the force and strength of all the wrathful kings.

With all our heart we pray (solwa deb so) to the Guru, the great master of Uḍḍiyāna: "With your
awakened vajra body, speech, and mind, inspire us with your blessing (jingyi lab tu sol);
ripen and liberate our minds! Pacify all the aforementioned outer, inner, and secret obstacles
(chi nang sangwé barché shyiwa dang) towards accomplishing enlightenment, without
exception! Without resorting to strenuous effort and upon our merest wish, may all of our
aspirations (sampa), particularly those that accord with the Dharma—all that is meaningful
in this life and the next—be spontaneously fulfilled (lhün gyi drubpar jingyi lob), as naturally
and easily as rivers flowing into the sea!" Thus, we invoke the Guru's sacred vow
by means of our prayer.

2. The Inner, Hidden Meaning

The three times (dü sum) refers to the inner structure of the physical vajra body. Past refers
to the heating and diminishing, or setting, of the essential constituents[3] caused by
the solar winds. These course through the red rasanā channel on the right side, one of the
three principal channels. Thus, past indicates the setting or extinguishing of the spoiled
solar [wind]. Present refers to the growth of the essential constituents, or the soothing
and cooling of their coarse aspects, caused by the lunar winds which course through the
white lalanā channel on the left side. Thus, present indicates the settling and growth of
the lunar aspect, which gives rise to bliss.[4] In rāhu, the central avadhūti channel, the
wisdom winds flow. Future means when the wind-dependent mind and the bindus have entered
rāhu, and the solar and lunar winds have thereby been consumed, so that great, non-conceptual
wisdom takes birth within one's being.

Furthermore, the pure white element [of the physical vajra body] is the awakened vajra body
of the buddhas, the red element is awakened vajra speech, and non-conceptuality is awakened
vajra mind. These are the primordially, naturally pure buddha (sangyé), the precious master
(guru rinpoché), who is heavy with all the enlightened qualities and who transcends all
that is to be attained or abandoned. At such a [primordial] time, this great being intrinsically
abides beyond increase or decrease, transference or change.

At the time of the path, one applies the key instructions to the physical vajra body, consisting
of the channels and the winds and bindus that course within them. All the qualities of
the paths and bhūmis are thereby produced and perfected instantaneously. Moreover, these
qualities being primordially and spontaneously perfected, without needing to be sought anywhere
else, is precious (rinpoché). The master of all supreme and common siddhis (ngödrub
kün dak) is great bliss (dewa chenpo) [which is produced as follows]. Below the navel resides
the essence of the red element, or inner heat (caṇḍālī), in the form of an 'a'-stroke
(།) which has the nature of fire. At the crown resides the essence of the white element in
the form the haṅ syllable (ཧྃ) which has the nature of lunar nectar.[5] Through igniting
the blissful warmth of blazing and dripping, a sublime and immutable great bliss pervades
the entire body and mind with melting pleasure. Illustrative wisdom is thereby born within
one's being, and through gradually perfecting habituation to this, the ultimate wisdom (that
which is to be illustrated) forcefully arises within one's being.

When practicing in this way, the hindrances and obstacles (barché) that disturb the channels,
winds, and bindus are all dispelled (kün sel), and the crooked demons of the fiery winds
within the lalanā and rasanā are conquered (dü dul). While one is applying these forceful
yogic exercises to the physical vajra body and thus allowing the body's channels to be naturally
purified: physically practice flowing, soaring, exhausting, and dropping; verbally
practice the long and short "ha" as well as the drawing of the hūṃ; and apply the key points
mentally. Purifying the winds in this way brings thoughts forcefully to a halt within
the avadhūti channel.

By becoming accustomed to this training, body, speech, and mind will ripen into the three self-existing
vajras. This city of the physical vajra body embodies the outer, inner, and secret
Guru, which in Hevajra is referred to as "great wisdom," and in The Magical Net [of Vajrasattva]:
Mirror [of All Secrets] as "the indestructible bindu." The entire maṇḍala of
deities of the outer practice of the Barché Künsel are physically present and are generated
as such. This is the explanation according to the generation stage of Mahāyoga. The maṇḍala
of the inner practice of Dewa Chenpo and Sampa Lhündrup are present as the channels and
bindus. This is the explanation according to Anuyoga. The secret practice, the self-existing
wrath of Dorjé Drakpo Tsal, arises as the maṇḍala of the innate dharmatā indivisible
from awareness. This is the explanation according to the Atiyoga. In this section my intention
has been to explain the generation phase practices according to three yogas and link
them with the hidden meaning of the perfection phase.

3. The Secret, Ultimate Meaning

The three times (dü sum) applies to the body, speech and mind. The past is reflected in the
momentariness of the body, which is subject to birth and death. The present is reflected in
speech—the inhalation and exhalation of air—based upon which the body and mind remain. The
mind produces the proliferation of future dualistic thoughts and saṃsāra. Their relative
importance is thus taught.

In the fourth time transcending these three times (dü sum), the time of equality, resides the
lord of the original ground, the glorious self-existing buddha (sangyé), the forefather
of all the tathāgatas: Guru (guru) Samantabhadra. He is all-pervasive, unobstructed and unobscured,
the universal embodiment of the wisdom of dharmadhātu, for he pervades all of saṃsāra
and nirvāṇa and transcends all attributes; of mirror-like wisdom, for his verbal clarity
illuminates all phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa; equality, for existence and peace are
for him of a single taste; and the great wisdom of discernment, for he distinguishes all
phenomena. Originally and naturally pure, his qualities complete from the very beginning,
he is precious (rinpoché).

Siddhis, meaning attainments (ngö drup), refers to the Guru's all-accomplishing wisdom, and
implies that this great being (kun dak) brings total and complete benefit to all sentient
beings within existence and peace. The king of self-knowing awareness, the teacher Unchanging
Light, is endowed with the supreme of all aspects. He abides within the expanse of the
single sphere, the perfection of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, as perpetual great bliss (dewa chenpo).
Thus, the Great Perfection tantra The Revelation of Bodhicitta: Perfect, Pure Reality,
refers to him as "self-existing, the dharmatā."

At the time of the path, the mind's obscurations lessen due to the pith-instructions of the
guru and the awakening of one’s own karmic propensities. Then, naked awareness can be introduced
directly and decided upon, bringing confidence in the great natural liberation.[6]
By applying these three key statements, all the qualities of the three kāyas and the pure
visions of path will increase, be perfected and absorbed within all-encompassing space. As
they dissolve into great inner luminosity, you capture the citadel of limpid and subtle,
great luminous wisdom within the sphere of precious, spontaneous accomplishment.[7]

When you gain the realization, experience, and confidence of the dharmatā, you conquer the enemy
of ignorantly holding to eternalism and nihilism, and destroy the foundation of the three
realms of existence. Here, the reference to the enemy of māras (dü) means that the māras
are tamed (dul) from within, and thoughts, the basis for dualistic grasping, are defeated
by awareness. This vajra of awareness, fierce and ferocious, is the innate yidam Mighty
Wrathful King (drakpo tsal). You thus attain the supreme level of a fully awakened heruka,
a teacher youthful, brave, and powerful. This sacred fruition is referred to in the tantra,
The Perfect Profundity of Primal Wisdom as "primordially present."

The first three lines of this prayer can also be explained respectively according to the mind
section (sem dé), the space section (long dé) and the pith-instruction section (mengak dé).[8]
Explained generally and according to their literal meaning, the remaining three lines
of the prayer can refer to realizations upon the paths of the latter two,[9] an invocation
of the Guru's blessings (jin gyi lab) [to attain these], and a request for these siddhis
(ngödrub). So concludes the main explanation of the prayer, according to the general, hidden,
and ultimate meanings.

Now, what follows is an explanation according to the sacred syllables:[10] The prayer's first
line represents the syllable 'e', the element of space, which appears triangular in shape
and symbolizes the space of the vajra-queen. This is the mother who gives birth to all the
victors, in other words, the Guru (guru). The second line represents the syllable 'vaṃ',
the element of water, which is in the shape of a vajra. It appears as the father or means
which gives birth to great bliss (dewa chenpo). The third line represents the syllable 'ma',
the fire element, the tamer of the hordes of demons (dü dul)—the male or female māras,
yāmas, mamos, rākṣasas, bhūtas, and asuras. The great wrathful heruka Mighty Wrathful King
(dorjé drakpo tsal) is prior to the syllable 'ma', and he tramples upon the hosts of arrogant
spirits in extreme fury. The fourth line onwards represents the syllable 'yā', the
increase of the wind element, which gives rise to and gathers the qualities of the paths and
bhūmis. Thus, this shows how one attains the sacred level of mastery—a king of the dharma,
for whom the twofold benefit is spontaneously accomplished.

If you thus recite this prayer one-pointedly, blessings will soon suffuse your whole being,
for the compassion of Master Padmākara is swift. As he has proclaimed:[11]

Seeing me, all the buddhas are seen,Accomplishing my practice, the practice of all the buddhas
is accomplished,For I am the embodiment of all the sugatas.

And:

I shall come, unable to resist,When with devotion and strong, fervent prayersYou pray to me,
the Lotus-Born of Uḍḍiyāna.I will come to you.

Likewise, the colophon to the third chapter of The Prayer in Seven Chapters, called The Prayer
Requested by Khandro Yeshé Tsogyal,[12] explains how such prayer will fulfil the needs
and wishes of all beings.

I, Pema Yeshe Dorje,Wrote this short explanationAs soon as it came to my mindOn the twenty-fifth
day of the sixth month of the Water Bird year.[13]

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2021 (trans. Stefan Mang and Peter Woods).